HARI SREENIVASAN: But,
first, the analysis
of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
It's good.
It looks like you're
paying attention.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
So, let's start
with health care.
This week, we started
with repeal and replace.
And then it went to
repeal now, replace later.
Neither of those seem
to be going anywhere.
MARK SHIELDS: The
Republicans' health care
plan had three problems.
It wasn't healthy, it wasn't
caring, and there was no plan.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: It was
just that simple.
I mean, you can't get
people to vote for something
when they don't know,
A, what it is, there's
no public case for it, but,
beyond that, it just -- the
conservatives, led by Rand Paul,
objected that it didn't root
out and repeal Obamacare.
That was correct.
And the moderates, embodied by
Susan Collins, who we just saw
in the previous piece, objected
that it was going to hurt,
unnecessarily and gratuitously,
millions of Americans who are
needy and depend on Medicaid.
True.
So, the two were
almost irreconcilable.
And I think they can't figure
out now how to leave the
field without embarrassment.
Ideally, if you're a Republican,
you do not want to vote on this.
You do not want to vote
Tuesday, because it's going
to be used against you.
It is incredibly unpopular.
It's got 16 percent
support in the country.
There is not one person
of the 213 in Republican
- - in the House of
Representatives voted against
it who regrets having
voted against it.
And there are scores of House
members in the 217 who voted
for it who are nervous that
they voted for it.
So, that's where it is.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I
don't think it's dead.
I think, from what I hear,
they're leaning on Mike Lee,
the senator who has been a no
vote who is the decisive no
vote, to change his mind, to
buy him out with something and
offer him something.
And then they figure, once they
get him on board, there are
probably another Republican
15 senators who would like to
vote no, but they don't want
to be the one person who kills
it.
And so the feeling, if you
can get Mike Lee, you can
get some of the others.
And they might pass it.
I wouldn't say it's likely,
but I think -- I just think
it's too early to say it's dead
now.
The second thing to say
is, Mitch McConnell has
two parts of his job.
The one is to create a
process where reasonable
legislation gets promoted.
And the second is to whip
for that legislation.
I think he did an abysmal
job on one job and a
pretty good job on job two.
As Mark said, you have got a
plan with 16 percent approval.
Nobody in the Senate likes
it, including the Republicans.
They all hate having
to vote for it.
And he still got 48 votes.
That's kind of impressive.
But the underlying problem
is, you have a chance to
change, to reform health care.
There are a lot of conservative
ideas to reform health care.
And it would solve
some problems.
You could pick some things that
a lot of people would like.
You could have catastrophic
coverage for the 20-odd million
people that are still uninsured
after Obamacare.
You could do a lot of -- offer a
lot of things to a lot of people
and do it in a conservative
way.
But that's not what this
Republican Party does.
They just say, we
want to cut Medicaid.
And they're unwilling to
talk about anything positive,
though there are some things in
the bill.
It's just, what can
we take away from you?
And what can we take away
from the poor and the
needy and the children?
And it's a publicity and
a substantive disaster
area that they're just
trying to live with.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about
the president's role in this?
MARK SHIELDS: The president's
role in it is mercurial.
He said let Obama
founder and burn.
Then the next day,
he says no, within 24
hours to the Republican
senators, you have got to
come up with a plan.
He knows nothing
about the specifics.
about the substance.
He's made no public case for it.
I don't -- I think David
makes a very compelling point.
I would just say this, that
Mitch McConnell had a reputation
as this master strategist.
And what Mitch McConnell's
greatest accomplishment
as leader has been is
that he denied a hearing
to one of the sixth
most qualified nominees
to the Supreme Court
in the last century.
That's it.
There's a big difference between
obstruction and construction and
putting together a coalition.
And it's a lot easier to get
people to vote against something
than it is to vote for something
and to take a chance.
And when you're denied the
individual mandate, that is you
let healthy young people not pay
anything, you leave as a
pool of people for insurance
who are older and sicker.
Therefore, it's going
to be more expensive.
I mean, you know, this isn't
rocket scientists, in spite of
the president saying it's a lot
more complicated than it is.
DAVID BROOKS: I thought
something important
happened with the
Republican views with the
president.
They were having all these
meetings in the White House.
And, apparently, they'd have
these substantive meetings with
Mike Pence or with somebody
else, with staff.
And they would talk
through things.
They would try to
make some progress.
And then the president would
dip in and do something, say
something extremely stupid,
extremely ill-informed.
And then they would all
groan and live through it
and wish he would leave.
And then he would go.
And so that could be a
change in psychology.
Everybody in the Senate has
problems with the president.
But if you begin to have, oh,
he's just the crazy uncle,
like an attitude of contempt,
then relationships between
the Republicans on the Hill
and the White House really do
begin to change.
It's not some guy, oh, he
has some political magic.
It's some guy who really just
is annoying and gets in the way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk
about the interview that he gave
to, some people would call it
the paper of record, and
the President Trump calls it
the failing New York Times.
In this conversation, which is
worth reading in its entirety,
it's just fascinating, he
lashes out at lots
of his supporters.
He undermines his
own attorney general.
He goes after almost a
broadside to Robert Mueller.
He talks about
blackmail and Comey.
What did you glean out of that?
DAVID BROOKS: First, our
subscription levels have been
way up since the Trump era.
And one of our journalists
tweeted out, we even
fail at failing.
That's how bad we are.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: And there
are a couple things to
say about the interview.
One, I was shocked by the
lack of just articulateness.
We all hate it when we read
a transcript of ourselves.
It's always embarrassing,
but not that embarrassing.
These really are random --
they're not even thoughts.
They're just little word
patterns, one following
another, about Napoleon,
about this and that.
It's a disturbing level
of incoherent thinking.
Second, it is -- you know,
people who work for the White
House work for the guy 16, 20
hours a day, And
Jeff Sessions in the
administration among them,
and to dump over everybody.
And then what is interesting
to me psychologically,
usually, when someone
is corrupt or -- they
are clever.
They try to dissemble.
They mask their corruption with
some attempt to be dishonest.
Donald Trump, give him credit,
he's completely transparent.
He basically said in that
interview, my corruption can
be found in my tax returns.
If you look into my tax
returns, I will fire you.
He transmits everything that
he's thinking out in public
in an incredibly transparent
way.
So we're looking at a fact
where Bob Mueller will
probably go to the tax returns.
Donald Trump will
probably fire Bob Mueller.
And then we will be in some
sort of constitutional crisis.
And it's all telegraphed
right there out in the open.
MARK SHIELDS: I
was amazed by it.
I mean, first of all, I guess
just on a personal level, this
is a man for whom there is no
loyalty, no sense of
loyalty in anybody.
I mean, Jeff Sessions, whatever
one thinks of him, was a
Republican senator from Alabama,
the first senator in the
country to endorse Donald
Trump, and a strong supporter.
And, as attorney general, all
Donald Trump cares about, is
Jeff Sessions going to protect
me?
And it shows I think
a couple things.
It shows the obsession he has
with the Russian investigation.
There's no two ways about it.
I mean, again, he recycles
these baseless charges about
Jim Comey, that he perjured
himself in testimony before the
Senate Intelligence Committee,
which he didn't, that he leaked
confidential information,
which he didn't.
And -- but there's absolutely
no sense of loyalty that he
has to anyone else, Donald
Trump.
And I just find that -- you
know, we talk about, is there
smoke there or whatever?
His obsession with the
Russian investigation,
now he's back blaming
Rod Rosenstein for firing
Comey.
But he went on Lester Holt
on NBC News and took credit
for it, said, didn't make any
difference what Sessions
and Rosenstein recommended.
I was going to fire him anyway.
So, I'm just -- there's
no coherence to the man,
but there's an obsession.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, let's
talk a little bit about somebody
who has been loyal to the
president, Sean Spice,
who stepped down today.
He resigned over the
announcement that Anthony
Scaramucci was going to
be named communications
director.
Scaramucci played it down.
He and Spicer and I think Reince
Priebus were all scheduled to
go on FOX tonight in a sort
of unified show, right?
But what do you make of it?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I mean,
Sean Spicer, prior to going to
work at the White House, those
of us who had dealt with him
over the years, he was likable,
he was helpful, he was a loyal
Republican, but
a square shooter.
As soon as he made the bargain
to go to work for Donald Trump,
you know, I don't know if
he sold his soul, but
he sold part certainly
of his self-respect.
The very first thing Trump
demanded that he do was to go
out and lie about the size of
the crowd on inauguration.
And Sean Spicer did it.
And then he lied about the
orders that Barack Obama
had, in fact, bugged,
wiretapped, President
Obama had, the headquarters
of Donald Trump's building.
And then it was that three
million undocumented immigrants
had voted on Election Day, and
that's why Donald Trump --
I mean, so, it was tragic to
watch this erosion of his own
integrity.
And he's not a bad guy
or anything of sort.
But everybody, I can honestly
say, with rare exception, who
has been associated with this
administration and
this president has
been diminished by it.
Their reputation
has been tarnished.
They're smaller people
as a result of it.
And that's tragic.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Does it
give you a glimpse into
the state of Twitter?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, that's the exact
point I was going to make.
Yes, I can't think of anybody
whose reputation has been
enhanced by going into the Trump
administration.
Rex Tillerson was a serious
businessman, well-respected.
Jeff Sessions was a
serious senator, pretty
conservative, quite serious.
Sean Spicer was a normal
communications guy in
Congress -- or in Washington.
So he's like an anti-mentor.
He takes everybody around
him and he makes them worse.
And so that's what
Spicer had to face.
And he will have to live
with that and live with
the reputational damage
that he's incurred.
Scaramucci is a very
interesting case.
He's a guy from Long Island.
Trump is from Queens.
They made it big
financially in the big city.
They have some sort
of parallel careers.
Scaramucci is a
very friendly guy.
Everybody is sort of
like a fun game to him.
And I thought his performance
today was quite good, actually.
And so it could be that he will
flourish in this White House.
He's very smart.
He's not to be intellectually
underestimated.
It could be he's chief
of staff before long.
And we will see.
But he's someone who has a
much more deft personal manner,
as well -- while being kind
of a wild guy, than anybody
else in there right now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally,
John McCain, this past week, it
was -- the entire Senate vote
was delayed because
of a surgery.
And it turned out what
they found in that surgery
was much more serious.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
I mean, I just think that
John McCain stands alone.
And I make no apologies for
thinking that highly of him.
At a time when you look at
these people on television,
starting with Scaramucci, a bad
guy who has a good performance,
they're flag lapel pin patriots.
John McCain never
wore a flag lapel.
John McCain didn't
wave the flag.
He defended it.
And he's been a leader in the
United States Senate on so
many issues, and especially,
I mean, not just simply taking
on big tobacco and big money,
but reaching across the aisle.
And de Gaulle said that the
cemeteries of Europe are
full of indispensable men.
I would say John McCain
is irreplaceable in
our national life.
And I just pray
that he recovers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Very
briefly to just his
position in the Senate?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
We have covered him a long time.
And I think we both
think more highly of him.
He's a man with intense
internal honesty.
He sometimes did stuff that
was political, but he always
seemed to -- he never, never
lied to himself.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
David Brooks, Mark Shields.
The transcript of this
will be very clear.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.